[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: All right.
Well, we have two more classes.
And this is day two
of trying to grapple
with the recent big breakthrough
in projection theory.
So this is sharp projection
theorems part two.
In part two, we're going to
talk about the AD regular case.
So let's first remember
our goal and remember
what is the AD regular case.
OK.
So our goal is the
Furstenberg set conjecture,
which is a theorem of Orponen,
Shmerkin, Ren, and Wang.
Says if E contained in R2
is a delta TC set, and then
for every point in
E, there are a bunch
of delta tubes going through it.
So T sub x is a
set of delta tubes
through x and the
directions, if you like,
of this set of delta
tubes is a delta SC set.
OK.
And parenthetically, we can
assume a couple of things.
We can assume that
this is uniform,
and also that the number of them
is like delta to the minus S.
And S should be bigger than 0.
OK.
So we put all of
these tubes together
to get one big set of tubes.
And the question is, how
many tubes are there?
So then the conclusion is
that the number of tubes
is at least a
little fudge factor.
So this whole thing, I'll
abbreviate like that.
And then the minimum
of a few options.
Which we'll call option
A, option B, and option
C. And these exponents
are hard to remember,
but I would prefer to
remember-- for everyone
to think of them in terms of
three different scenarios.
So option A, that
corresponds to the--
I call it the stars scenario.
Have a bunch of points,
and through each, you
have a bunch of
tubes, and they're
just unrelated to each other.
Option B is more intricate.
It's the integer grid scenario.
And option C is a kind
of random scenario.
So E is arbitrary
and T is random.
OK.
Now it's really a
good idea to think
about this theorem in these
three different scenarios.
So it's good to separate
out the case where
each one of those
things is the minimum.
So let me do that and
recall for you how much we
know about each case so far.
And I said something about
this last time, but what I said
wasn't the best
thing to say, so I
wanted to do it again
and get it right.
All right.
So there's the case where
A is the minimum option.
And if you do a
little algebra, that
corresponds to S being at least
as big as T. And in this case--
so if S is at least as big as
T, then the theorem is true.
So Furstenberg is true.
And it follows just
by double counting.
So we did it very early in the
course, like on the second day.
OK.
Then I'll come back to B,
which is the most interesting.
C is the minimal.
If you do a little algebra,
it's if S plus T is at least 2.
And in this whole range,
where S plus T is at least 2,
the theorem is also true.
And it's true by
the Fourier method.
So it follows from
the theorem we
proved in the second or third
week using Fourier analysis.
So the whole case
where C is minimal,
we also already understand that.
OK.
And that leaves a case
where B is minimal.
And that's like otherwise,
if neither of these things
are true, then B is minimal.
And so that's the
content of this theorem.
So this is the hard new
thing in the OSW thing.
OK.
Cool.
Another little comment is
that the number of tubes
is not my favorite
parameter to keep track of.
My favorite parameter
to keep track of
is I'll call it R of ET.
Which, in words, is
like the typical number
of delta balls of E on a typical
tube of T. Let's make a picture.
So we have some delta
balls, and then we
have some delta tubes
going through them.
And in an interesting
scenario, each tube
will have many balls in it.
And R is this number
of balls in a tube.
So algebraically,
by double counting,
the number of balls
in a tube would
be the number of points
times the number of tubes
going through a point divided
by the number of tubes.
So that would be the
algebraic definition of R.
And then it's easy to convert
bounds for T into bounds for R.
So our theorem is equivalent
to that R is upper bounded
by the maximum of three things.
Scenario one is A.
So scenario one, the
number of balls per tube
is one, which is
always easy to arrange.
B, you have to do a
little computation.
It works out to this.
I don't really care what the
exponent-- it's not important
what the exponents are.
And C is delta to the
negative T plus 1.
OK.
And this delta to
the negative T plus 1
has a nice interpretation which
might clarify a little bit what
we mean by this random case.
So if E is a set--
is a delta TC set, so the size
of E is delta to the minus T.
Let me say it this way.
Suppose that E is a set
of delta to the minus T
delta balls in the unit ball.
And then I take the average
over any choice of delta
by 1 rectangles of the
number of delta balls
that the rectangle covers.
You would get delta
to the minus T plus 1.
So it's not difficult to locate
rectangles with that richness.
Almost any rectangle
would do the job.
And scenario C is when
the rectangles just
have this average richness.
There's really nothing
special about them.
OK.
So next, let's remember--
so our goal today
is to talk about
the AD regular case.
So let's remember what
is the AD regular case.
OK.
So we're going to suppose
that E is uniform.
So that means that our delta
is some capital delta to the M,
where M is a large number.
And the uniformity
is that if I take E
and I intersect it with a cube
of side length delta to the j,
and I ask about its delta to
the j plus 1 covering number,
that's around some beta j
for all the dyadic Q delta j
that intersect.
OK.
So these beta j are
the branching numbers.
We drew pictures last time
to illustrate what they mean.
And so definition would be that
E is C alpha is to be regular.
So actually let's say it's
a delta TC AD regular set
if has this branching
structure like above
and if I take the product j
equals 1 to capital J of beta j.
So that would be the
delta j covering number--
delta to the j covering
number of our set.
It is at most C times delta
to the j to the minus t,
and it is at least
1 over C times
delta to the j to the minus t.
OK.
All right.
So let's label all these
hypotheses in our theorem
by H, our hypotheses.
And what we'd like to understand
is given these hypotheses,
how big could R be?
And for today, we're going to
talk about the AD regular case.
So let's give that a name.
So RAD of ST delta C. That
is the maximum over E and T
obey our hypotheses,
and E is a delta TC AD
regular of r of E and T. How
big could it be in this case?
OK.
It's really a mouthful
of parameters,
so let me just say, to reduce
a little bit for today,
we'll have C equals 1.
So that means it's
really AD regular,
and everything we say
actually will work for small c
that are bigger than E. That
will allow us to not write
the letter C. And
then S and T will not
be changing through
our argument,
so I won't write
them every time.
So now I'll just abbreviate
it as RAD of delta.
OK.
All right.
So the theorem that
Orponen and Shmerkin proved
is that they proved this
thing in the AD case.
So RAD ST delta is
indeed bounded by that.
I'm not sure I copied it right.
Got the minus signs wrong.
So that's our goal for
today is to understand
this theorem, which is a
really important special case
of that theorem.
Cool.
So it's clearly a special
case of that theorem.
And at first it might seem
like a very special case,
because these branching
function basically-- there's
a huge range of what the
branching function could be,
and AD regular is just
one particular choice
in this huge range.
But it's a particularly
important case,
and we'll see tomorrow or
next class that this is really
a crucial case.
It plays a big role in
understanding the theorem
in general.
OK.
Cool.
Yeah.
It was a really
important realization
in thinking about this theorem
that we should break it
into cases.
The different cases have their
different things that are useful
and their different
things that are difficult.
And so that recognition is key.
So the next thing I want
to try to talk about
is what is special
about AD regular sets
that we could use to get a
handle on them that we couldn't
use just for the general setup.
All right.
So this proof is
quite difficult.
We won't do all of it.
But I would like to share
some key ideas about it, which
I think are really cool and
are worth taking with you away
from this class.
All right.
OK.
So in a nutshell, the
important special thing
about AD regular
sets is in this lemma
that has a one board
proof, which is called
the submultiplicative lemma.
OK.
So it says that RAD of delta--
let me put it this way.
If delta is delta
1 times delta 2,
then RAD of delta
is bounded by--
and with a little bit of fudge--
RAD of delta 1
times RAD delta 2.
That is submultiplicative.
And it follows from
understanding, thinking
a lot about a picture
of an AD regular set.
OK.
So remember that E is
a set of delta balls
and T is the set of delta
tubes, and we're going
to imagine thickening them.
So in this setup
here, delta is smaller
than delta 1 and delta 2,
which are smaller than 1.
So delta 1 and delta 2 are
each bigger than delta.
So I'm going to thicken
them and I'll get E1,
I'll call it, which are
the delta 1 balls around E,
and T1, which are delta 1 tubes.
All right.
So what does it look like?
Let's think about E and
thickening E. So here is E1.
It is a bunch of circles.
Each circle has radius delta 1.
And inside of those circles,
there are some delta balls.
And those guys are
my delta balls E. OK.
Now, T1 are some delta 1 tubes.
So they might look like this.
Let's put one more ball up here.
That looks like that.
So those are my fat tubes, T1.
And then inside of them,
there are some delta tubes T2.
So let me draw that.
I've got too many, but
I'll try to give some idea.
So through this
point here, there
might be a couple
of red tubes that
are inside of that orange tube.
And then there might be
a couple of red tubes
that are inside of
that orange tube.
OK.
I just drew the ones
through this point.
Experience has taught
me that if I draw more,
this picture will get too messy.
But you should imagine that this
is happening at every point.
OK.
All right.
So the first observation
is that E1 and T1 obey
the hypotheses of our theorem.
Because actually, if you
take a delta T set of balls
and you thicken them
up to radius delta 1,
you get a delta
1 T set of balls.
At least, because
if it's uniform.
And if you look at who's
going through this point,
we have a delta S set of
directions leaving that point.
And if you thicken
them up a little bit,
you get the directions
corresponding
to the orange tubes.
And that will be a delta
1 S set of directions.
OK.
Great.
Yeah.
OK.
Actually, let me
put the punch line,
and then we'll think
through why this works.
So RAD of delta.
That's the number of
white balls in a red tube.
But that's bounded by the
number of delta 1 balls
in a delta 1 tube.
So I look in this orange tube,
I see how many of these balls
there are, times the number
of delta balls in a delta tube
within 1 delta 1 bar.
So if I'm looking at
this red tube here,
I want to know how many
delta balls are in it.
It's bounded by the
number of big balls
that it enters times the
number of little balls
in each of the big balls.
OK.
So we'd like to relate these
two things to our problem
at a coarser scale.
And this one here, well, E1
and T1 obey our hypotheses.
So this one here is
bounded by RAD delta 1.
Now here, if you take E
and T and you restrict them
to a delta 1 ball,
and then you magnify
it to bring it up to scale one,
this also obeys our hypotheses.
So if you look inside of here,
you see a little delta TS set.
This and these red tubes, that's
the same situation on a smaller
scale or on a coarser scale.
So when you blow this
up, if you blow it up,
then you get delta 2 balls and
delta 2 tubes in the unit ball.
So this guy is bounded
by the RAD of delta 2.
OK.
Let me call this claim
one and claim two.
All right.
So this picture is perhaps
the most important thing
to take away from this
proof in this class.
So take a moment and see if you
have questions about this proof.
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
OK.
So the question is,
do we need to check
that everything is AD regular.
Yeah.
OK.
So let me add to these claims,
and then if we want to,
we can add details to the
proof of these claims.
E1 and T1 obey the hypotheses,
and they're AD regular.
And we need that this blow
up here obeys the hypotheses
and it's AD regular.
And if you believe
those two things,
then you can plug-- you just
plug in and you get that.
Yeah.
And we can talk a little bit
more about those two things
if you want.
Are there other
questions or comments?
OK.
So I'll probably
add a little more,
but actually, I wanted to
ask you all a question.
In this argument, where did
we take advantage of the fact
that the original
E was AD regular?
Yeah, Jonathan?
AUDIENCE: Is it like picking one
delta 1 ball and magnifying it?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So it's related to when we
picked this one delta 1 ball
and magnified it.
Yeah.
OK.
So let's talk about one and
two a little more carefully.
All right.
So let's discuss one and two.
OK, so point one.
If E and T are uniform--
which we can pretty much
assume from the-- which
we can assume from the
beginning with a little pruning.
Then E delta T implies that
E1 is delta 1T and Tx delta S
implies that T1x is delta 1x.
And also, if E is
AD regular, that
implies that E1 is AD regular.
Because this is saying all
the branching numbers of E
are the same as each other.
And this is saying that all
the branching numbers of E
down to the depth of delta 1
are the same as each other.
OK.
We didn't need E to be a
regular to do this or this,
but it comes in in part two.
So because E is AD
regular, then we
get that if you take E and you
intersect it with a small ball
and magnify it, then
this is a delta--
I guess delta 2T and AD regular.
So let me illustrate this with
pictures instead of equations.
So what does it look like?
Let's draw an AD regular set
and a not AD regular set,
and we'll look at both of them.
So if E is AD
regular, what do I do?
I pick, say, four of them.
Let me do this in the color.
Then for each one that I
picked, I subdivide it.
And I pick four of them.
OK.
I'll stop drawing.
You get the idea.
OK.
Now, this is a
self-similar construction.
If I take this thing in
here and I blow it up,
it's just like what
I started with.
So it will be AD regular and
it will be-- in particular,
in delta, there will be a delta
T set for the appropriate delta.
OK.
What would it look like
if E was not AD regular?
Well, for example, I might
do the following thing.
I might cut it into
a four by four grid,
and I might take
all of the boxes.
And then I could cut each one
of them into a four by four grid
and pick just one box.
So this was the well-spaced
example that we drew last time.
OK.
So this whole thing
is a delta T set.
But if I took just one of
these boxes, what I would see
is much more concentrated.
This is not a delta T set.
So if I were to take
this guy and take it out
here and magnify it, then inside
of here I would just see this.
This here is a blank T set, but
this here is not a blank T set.
Whereas in the AD regular case,
if I were to take one of these
and bring it out and magnify it,
then what I would see in here
would be very similar
to the original set.
This is similar to E. So
this here is a blank T set
and it's AD regular.
And that thing in there
is still a blank T set
and it's still AD regular.
OK.
So this is the special
feature AD regular.
The word regular
refers to the fact
that all the different
scales look the same.
And so when we look
inside this ball here,
we have another example of our
original problem at a coarser
scale.
And that feeds into
an inductive argument.
For example, we can say this
submultiplicative lemma.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: The first
equality over there,
do you need some of
uniformity on the number
of the balls from A to C?
Because RAD is like the average,
and you're saying something
like the average is less
than or equal to [INAUDIBLE]
the averages.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
That's right.
Yes.
That is a good point.
So the comment is that RAD was
defined as an average number
of delta tubes per delta ball.
And here I was pretending that
all the tubes are average.
So let's call this
a proof sketch.
You do need some uniformity.
If you think back to
the original setting,
you have this set E and then
you draw all these tubes.
You can sort them by how many
delta tubes are in each one.
And you take the category
that has the most delta tubes,
and that will still
you can work with that.
So you can do--
you're correct.
We have to uniformize it, and
it's possible to uniformize it.
OK.
So let me describe that.
So we can do some
uniformizing so all tubes
have the same number of balls.
OK.
Other questions or comments?
Cool.
All right.
So this little lemma
is very important.
For people who have
seen some other things
in harmonic analysis, there's
a submultiplicative lemma
that's sort of like this
in decoupling theory.
And it's the beginning of
what's special about decoupling.
If those words don't
mean anything to you,
don't worry about it.
So let me show you some
corollaries, some applications
of this lemma.
And then we'll go in
earnest into using
it to prove this theorem.
All right.
So the first application
is sort of tongue in cheek,
but also I think it's
philosophically important.
I'm going to call it--
so applications.
I'm going to call it a brute
force proof of our theorem,
of theorem of the
AD regular case.
So here's how it goes.
So for some specific delta
0, we check by brute force
that RAD ST delta is bounded
by the right-hand side.
We won't be able to
get it perfectly,
but we could get
something like this.
OK.
So how could you do this?
Once you fix a particular
delta 0, like 1 over a million,
there are really only
finitely many different ways
you could arrange
the delta balls,
and there are really
only finitely many ways
you could put the tubes.
So there's a giant
brute force calculation
that you couldn't really
do but we could imagine,
and you could just check this.
Once you have this, then you
use the submultiplicative lemma
many times.
And so when you
used it once, you
would get RAD ST
delta 0 squared.
That would be bounded by
right-hand side times delta
squared to the minus epsilon.
Because the right-hand side
is just the power of delta 0,
so it multiplies.
Everything fits
and you keep going.
OK.
So this brute force
computation is so large
that it's out of the
question to do it even
with a supercomputer, et cetera.
Nevertheless, it
is worth noticing
that this very difficult
theorem has a one blackboard
proof up to a brute
force computation,
up to a finite computation.
Most difficult theorems in math.
It's not obvious how to reduce
to a finite computation.
I wouldn't say this
is obvious either,
but for most difficult
theorems in math,
there's not a half page
argument to reduce it
to a finite computation.
For this one, there is.
So it shows that this
is quite important.
OK.
Let me give another application.
Second application
is the general case.
General AD versus
the projective AD.
So the course was called
projection theory.
And at the beginning we
talked about problems
about orthogonal projections.
And this theorem is
really more general.
I guess I've erased the theorem.
The theorem we're
talking about today
is more general than just
orthogonal projections.
And if you had some
orthogonal projections,
the way you would
get all these tubes
is you would pick a direction
from your direction set,
and then you would
get a bunch of tubes
in that direction
that cover your set.
So I make a definition.
Let's say that ET is
projective if for every x in E,
the direction set
of the tubes Tx--
let me put it this way.
For every x1 and x2
in E, the direction
of the tubes through
x1 is the same
as the direction of
the tubes through x2.
In other words, you have
just one set of directions,
and Tx is all the tubes through
x in that set of directions.
OK.
So if you think about the
problem that we wrote down,
this is a very special case.
So it used to be at
every point you picked
your own independent
set of tubes,
but now there's an extra
rule that the directions have
to be the same at each point.
So a very special case.
OK.
So let's say RAD
projection of delta
is the maximum over
the usual stuff.
So ET obeys our hypotheses.
E is AD regular, but
also, ET is projective.
All right.
So in general, we're
taking a maximum.
And this is a
restricted maximum,
so we clearly have that RAD
projective is smaller than RAD.
But it turns out that they're
basically equal to each other.
So let's make that a lemma.
So RAD of delta
is less than here.
There is some fudge
factors, so I'll
write something like
this C epsilon delta
to the minus epsilon.
Actually, let me--
I won't quite say
that that's true.
But let me just say something.
OK.
So here's a cool
observation based
on that diagram and that proof.
So notice that in the
submultiplicative lemma
if delta 1 equals delta 2 equals
square root of delta, then
the inner--
the small ball problems
are all projective.
OK.
So in this problem, we have a
delta scale Furstenberg problem,
and we broke it up into
two pieces, a coarse piece
at the large scale and a small
piece inside each small ball.
So I claim that this piece
inside the small ball
is projective.
Why is it?
Well, so take one
of these points,
and I'm going to look at the
directions of the red tubes
going through this point.
Now I'm working
in this small ball
so I can only
distinguish them up
to an angle of the
square root of delta.
So what directions will they be?
They'll be the directions of
these orange tubes going out
through here.
So there could well
be two long red tubes
going through here that are
in the same orange tube.
But inside of this
small ball, they'll
just be on top of each other.
I won't see any
difference between them.
So the directions that I'll
see within the small ball,
they just correspond
to these orange tubes.
And if I look at different
guys inside the small ball,
I have the same set
of orange tubes.
OK.
So that gives me an inequality.
RAD delta is bounded by RAD
delta to the 1/2 times RAD
projective delta to the 1/2.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: I thought
that you were
writing projective [INAUDIBLE].
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right.
Only the inner
one is projective.
The outer one is arbitrary.
However, we can repeat this.
So now that's bounded
by RAD delta to the 1/4,
RAD projective delta to the 1/4,
RAD projective delta to the 1/2.
And now you can keep going.
OK.
So you do this many times.
There will be a T
appendix left here
that still has no projective on
it, but it will be very minor.
And the rest of them
all have projective.
And so the conclusion is
that to prove the theorem,
it suffices to check
the projective case.
So that's a cute application
of the submultiplicative.
OK.
So those are a couple of cute
applications of this lemma.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Is that
an extra RAD delta
to the kind of 1 over epsilon
where the delta T epsilon error
term comes from?
Or is it a conditional
thing as well?
LAWRENCE GUTH: There
are several places where
we might incur a delta T
epsilon in the final thing,
and this is one of them.
Yeah.
OK.
So let's say something
big picture about trying
to prove this theorem.
So we were saying yesterday that
for a while in this subject,
there were only kind of-- there
were only epsilon improvements
on some classical things.
And what was very
striking to me is
to go from just making
epsilon improvements,
to go to proving
the sharp theorem.
And while Pablo
Shmerkin was visiting,
I talked with him a lot
about all this stuff.
And he said to me something one
day that really stuck with me.
He said, philosophically that--
yeah, here's how I
would like to put it.
That in order to prove this
theorem, what we need to do
is make an epsilon improvement
on the submultiplicative lemma.
So let me write
that down, because I
think it's worth taking
with you out of this class.
So philosophy.
To prove the theorem, what we
need at epsilon improvement
on the submultiplicative lemma.
OK.
So in other words, we'd like to
say either one possibility is
that RAD square root of delta
already obeys the bound.
OK?
Well, then we're happy.
And by the submultiplicative
lemma RAD of delta
also will obey the bound.
So we'll be happy.
Or we have-- so I'll write down
the submultiplicative lemma.
So that's the
submultiplicative lemma.
Or we have not this lemma, but
a little tiny improvement on it.
OK.
So in this case, of
course, we're happy.
And in this case,
we can iterate.
And so you can think
of RAD of delta
as being some power of delta.
And then every time we do
this, that power goes down,
or some negative power of delta.
Every time we do this, that
power is going to go down.
It will keep going down
until we get into this case
and we're happy.
All right.
So let's illustrate that.
So if, say, we
have RAD of delta--
let me write it this way.
It'll be easier.
It's delta to the minus gamma.
Then we'd have RAD of delta
squared would be bounded by--
so this would give us delta to
the minus 2 gamma plus epsilon.
Then we would do this again.
RAD delta to the 1/4 would be
bounded by delta to the 1/4
to the minus gamma plus
epsilon plus epsilon.
We keep going and this exponent
keeps getting better and better,
until we can't make an
epsilon improvement anymore.
So if we have this dichotomy,
then we can get the theorem.
OK.
Cool.
All right.
So then you might
reflect, well, why
is it easier to make an epsilon
improvement kind of theorem
than it is to prove a really
sharp bound straight out?
Well, there's a thought
process for that,
which is we already
have a result
and then we want to make
an epsilon improvement.
Then we say to
ourselves, what would it
look like if the result
we have is sharp?
And maybe there's a
lot of specific things
that have to happen for the
result we have to be sharp,
so we get a lot of structure.
Then we have to get
a contradiction,
and that shows you can do
just a little bit better.
So that's why that
epsilon improvement
result is easier than just
getting a great bound straight
away.
So if we go back to
Bergen's projection theorem
and we tried to
make it an epsilon
improvement in a
projection theorem,
well, we didn't say
this at the time,
but it might have
been good to say.
What would it be like?
What would it mean if the
bound we have so far is sharp?
It would mean we have this
structure and that structure,
and eventually, we
have this subset
that is almost
closed under addition
and almost closed
under multiplication.
OK.
So the idea is we are going
to try to do the same thing.
We're going to think
about what would it
mean if the submultiplicative
lemma was sharp.
We're going to see
that it just means
the set has to have
a lot of structure,
and eventually, we'll get down.
Maybe not today, but
eventually Orponen and Shmerkin
got down to the
structures, got down
to the Bergen projection
theorem and got a contradiction.
OK.
So let's talk
about what would it
mean if the submultiplicative
lemma is sharp.
OK.
So let me draw a couple
pictures for you.
And one of the
pictures corresponds
to the submultiplicative lemma
is sharp and the other one,
it's not.
So we'll have some fat
balls in a fat tube.
And then in each fat
tube, in each fat ball,
we have some little balls.
And the little balls
are in little tubes.
So there's your typical little
tube OK, in each of these balls,
there are some--
in each of these fat balls,
there are some little balls.
OK.
So in this scenario,
in this picture,
would the submultiplicative
lemma be sharp or not sharp?
OK.
Stand next to the picture.
This picture, would the
submultiplicative lemma
be sharp or not sharp?
AUDIENCE: I don't
think it's sharp
because there's just one
tube for the coarser scale.
There's several tubes
for the fine scale.
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
So let me clarify what
this is a picture of.
So there are many
coarse scale tubes,
but I just drew one
of them, and I'm just
drawing what's happening
inside of one of them.
So inside of that one coarse
tube, this is what we see.
Based on this is the--
AUDIENCE: So there's
only one fine scale tube?
LAWRENCE GUTH: There could
be more fine scale tubes,
but this is a typical one.
Yeah, so there are many orange
tubes and many red tubes,
but I'm drawing only one of
each to focus our attention.
OK.
So let's review for
a second the proof
of the submultiplicative lemma,
because it's really important.
And maybe we'll go
in a little deeper,
and then I'll try
to show it again.
OK.
So our goal is to
estimate RAD of delta,
which is the number of
delta balls per delta tube.
So I picked a delta tube
like this red one here.
I'll have to estimate the
number of delta balls in it.
First I estimate the number of
fat balls that it intersects.
Then I multiply that by
the number of delta balls
that it intersects
within each fat ball.
And that was my bound.
And then each one of those
things, I bounded by induction
and I got those two numbers.
All right.
So if I take a particular
fat tube, and inside of it
a particular thin
tube and I see this,
would that argument be sharp?
Right.
OK.
So the suggestion is
that this is not sharp
because inside of this red
tube, most of the fat balls
are contributed nothing.
Only this one fat
ball is contributing.
And it would be
sharp if the number
of delta balls in the fat
ball was the number of--
sorry, the number of delta
balls in the delta tube
was the number of fat
balls times the number
of delta balls in one of them.
So let me show.
So this is not sharp, and let
me draw the one that's sharp.
You'll see the difference.
This is not sharp.
Delta tube should
look like this.
OK.
So the delta tube should
intersect a bunch of fat balls.
It should intersect that many
fat balls, as many as possible.
And inside each one
of them, it should
intersect a lot of delta
balls, as many as possible.
That's what it takes for
the submultiplicative lemma
to be sharp.
So it should look like this.
So this is sharp.
Cool.
And this is a kind
of striking picture.
So in this ball, these points
are in just a few tubes
in a certain direction.
You could also imagine we're
in the projective case.
And in these other balls, the
points are in those same tubes.
It goes all the way across.
Of course, the balls don't
have to look exactly the same
as each other, so maybe a
better picture might be like so.
But the tubes are
exactly the same.
OK.
So let me pause.
I'm going to erase a little bit
to make some space around here.
Is that OK with everybody?
That if the submultiplicative
lemma is sharp,
it has to look like
this, not like that.
OK.
All right.
So let's erase around
here a little bit.
OK.
So we already reduced
to the projective case.
So let's say D is the
set of directions,
which is the same everywhere
of our projections.
And so D is a delta
S set in S. And here
I fixed a typical fat tube.
So here's a typical
root delta tube.
And I'm going to look
at the angles that
are within this fat tube.
So here's our circle.
And there's a little
range of angles here.
This is a delta to the--
there's theta, which
is a delta to the one half arc.
That corresponds
to the fat tube.
OK.
And so D is some delta
set, delta SC set in here.
And let's say that C is
D intersected with theta.
So it's just these directions.
OK.
So the red tubes correspond to
one of the directions in theta.
So this one there.
Red tube.
And so when I project this
set in the red direction,
I just get a small set.
But it's not just
the red direction.
I could draw some other
directions inside of the tube
also.
Let me do one more.
I'll take here a blue
direction inside of here.
So I draw the tubes
in the blue direction.
What would it look like?
I think I need to make this
picture come out nicely.
I need to add a few more points.
So that'd be one more red tube.
Oops.
And now I'll draw a
typical blue tube.
The blue tube also manages to
intersect our points a lot,
so it should look like this.
I don't think I
can draw any more
without making a complete
mess, but you get the idea.
So the blue tube passes
through all these balls also,
and each time the blue
tube passes through a ball,
it manages to line up
with one of the red tubes.
All right.
OK.
So we have a kind
of special situation
here with a product structure.
So what is our set?
So let's say over here
these dots, the projection
in the red direction,
let's call this A.
And then down here,
we can make a set
that illustrates where the
fat balls are in the fat tube.
Let's call that B. And so what
we see is that for every C in C,
the projection in
the C direction--
or I'll write it this way.
A plus CB-- that's the
projection in the C direction--
is not much bigger than A.
The projection in every one
of these directions is small.
They're all about the
same as each other.
A was the projection
in the red direction.
The blue one is just as good.
So A plus CB should be not
much bigger than A. OK.
OK.
So let me summarize
what we have seen here.
OK.
So f submultiplicative
lemma is sharp.
Then we get sets A
and B and C, which
are subsets of real numbers.
And in the main case,
A is a delta A A set.
It's rho A set.
Size of A is like rho to the
minus A. B is a rho B set.
Size of B is like rho to the
minus B. C is a rho C set.
Size of C is like
rho to the minus C.
And for every C in C, A plus CB
is not very much bigger than A.
OK.
Now the size of A and B and
C can all be traced back
to the numbers in our problem.
And we find that if A is
smaller than B plus C, that's
equivalent to saying that RAD
is square root of delta is good.
OK.
Sorry.
A is larger than B
plus C, then that means
you do a boring computation.
So there's an intermediate
result. Maybe I'll
call it a key lemma, which
is called the ABC sum product
lemma, which just goes into
this paper of Orponen-Shmerkin.
And it says if you have all
of this stuff then, indeed,
A is bigger than B plus C. Yeah?
AUDIENCE: What does good mean?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Good means
that it obeys the theorem.
So the theorem is up there.
So it's smaller than
the maximum of 1
and root delta to the minus
T over 2 plus S over 2
and root delta to the 1 minus
T. So if that's the case,
we're happy.
And otherwise-- yeah, OK.
OK, so let's go back to
our general strategy,
our big picture strategy.
We would like to prove this
theorem, that RAD of delta
is always smaller than that.
And we considered the
submultiplicative lemma,
which doesn't give
us the theorem yet,
but it's an important tool.
And we'd like to say if
we can have an epsilon
improvement in the
submultiplicative lemma, then
that's great.
We go to the next scale
and we have a better bound.
So you keep doing
that until you stop.
And we must stop in
a situation where
there's no more, where the
submultiplicative lemma becomes
sharp.
Maybe that's a
better way to say it.
We have this
submultiplicative lemma.
We use it.
It's either sharp or it's not.
If it's not, we get a
nicer exponent at delta
squared than we did at delta.
We keep doing that.
And the exponent is not going
to keep getting better forever,
so we stop at some moment where
the submultiplicative lemma is
basically sharp.
But the fact that the
submultiplicative lemma is sharp
gives us a lot of structure.
It gives us the structure
of being projective,
and it gives us this kind
of product structure.
And it leads us to
this problem, which
looks a lot like
additive combinatorics
and which is very
special problem compared
to our original setup.
And then the bound we need
to prove for this problem,
if you just unwind
the computation,
we need to prove this
bound for this problem.
If you unwind it,
it will tell us
that RAD obeys
the desired bound.
Yeah.
I guess rho is also--
rho Here is square
root of delta.
Yeah.
OK.
So this situation is now
a lot more structured
than what we started with.
And it looks reminiscent
of additive combinatorics,
maybe of Bergen projection
theorem and so on.
And indeed, they were able to
deal with it with that toolkit.
I could say a little--
I don't want to write
too many equations,
so I won't say the whole thing.
I could say a
little bit about it.
But I think that what
we've done so far
is what I feel is
most worth remembering
about the proof of this theorem.
So let's pause here and see
if people have any questions
or comments about it.
Let me summarize it.
So the AD regular
case is special
because all the scales
are related to each other.
And so we can break it up into
problems at different scales
and put them together.
And by doing that,
we get problems
that are somewhat nicer.
So first of all, if
we look at the problem
in a small ball instead
of the original problem,
it becomes nicer because the
directions through any point
are the same.
For any two points,
the directions
are the same because they
correspond to the directions
of the fat tube through there.
So this already made
it a little bit nicer.
Then, moreover, in order for
the submultiplicative lemma
to be sharp--
so if the submultiplicative
lemma is not sharp,
then you just keep
going down scales
and you keep getting
better exponents.
And eventually that has to stop
when the submultiplicative lemma
is sharp.
When the submultiplicative
lemma is sharp,
there's even more structure
because these different balls
have to talk to each other.
And so if you see in this
ball, you see a tube here,
then you have to see a tube in
the same place in that ball.
And that means that
this set of points
has kind of a product structure.
And in particular,
what's literally
true is if you take these--
well, sorry.
So if you take the set
of red tubes in this ball
and then in this ball
and then in this ball,
that is a product
which is very helpful.
OK.
Cool.
So the AD regular case allows us
to restrict to a situation which
has a lot more structure,
and it restricts
to this lemma about
projections of a product set.
OK.
AUDIENCE: So in
the argument, I can
continue until the
submultiplicative lemma
is sharp.
How do you know that kind
of sharpness corresponds
to the delta T epsilon
factor, rather than just
kind of something much smaller?
Because it seems like--
I don't understand how you can
get a quantitative bound out
of the more qualitative proof
by contradiction or-- yeah.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
OK.
So this question
is about keeping
track of the small parameters.
So every time I apply the
submultiplicative lemma,
I was using the word
sharp or not sharp.
But of course, there's
some kind of a gray zone
and I have to decide
where I'm going to cut.
What am I going to consider to
be sharp and what is not sharp?
And then, in this analysis--
yeah, OK.
Actually, so in order
for this to stop
in a reasonable
amount of time, I'm
going to have to have a cutoff
that's a tiny power of delta.
Otherwise this would go on
too long, wouldn't work.
So I would say, so what would
the definition of sharp be?
Let's do that.
All right.
Let's get rid of this set.
So we're going to use the
submultiplicative lemma
repeatedly.
And so if our AD
of delta is bigger
than, I need to put something
here, RAD of root delta squared.
And here I'm going to put
delta to the epsilon 0
where epsilon 0 is
a tiny parameter.
Then I'm going to
call this sharp
and I'm going to
stop and analyze.
And the other possibility
is that RAD of delta
is less than delta
to the epsilon 0
RAD of root delta squared.
And here I'm making
progress, so I'll keep going.
So this is the not sharp case.
So now I'll keep going.
OK.
So that's if we're more
careful about what is sharp
and not sharp.
All right.
So here, if I keep going every
time I make a definite amount
of progress, and so this
actually cannot keep going
forever because eventually the
exponents would be negative
instead of positive.
So it will stop, so
we will end up here.
Once we end up here, we have
to analyze the sharp case.
And we do have to remember,
it wasn't perfectly sharp,
but we had a fudge factor
of a tiny power of delta.
And that complicates all the
pictures that we have drawn.
So in this picture
here, this tube
goes through many fat tubes.
It doesn't have to have many
delta balls in all of them.
It has to have many delta
balls in a fraction, like delta
to the epsilon fraction of them.
So it makes the picture a
little bit more complicated.
And actually, because of
that, in this theorem,
if we were honest, it's a
little bit more complicated.
This would actually
be pi C of x,
where x is a subset
of A cross B and it's
like a delta to
the epsilon subset.
So we wouldn't have to
fill the whole product.
OK.
So that's how we would
be careful about sharp
and how we would have
to be more careful here.
OK.
Let me tell you
just the first idea
of the proof of this key lemma.
So we have step proof.
So we have A plus CB is only a
little bit bigger than A. That
reminds us of Plünnecke-Ruzsa.
So an appropriate version
of Plünnecke-Ruzsa.
Well, OK.
We have this big subset x.
We might want to get rid of that
by doing Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers.
So a Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers
would reduce to A prime plus CB
prime smaller than A prime.
We actually have
all of it instead
of just a big piece of it.
And then Plünnecke-Ruzsa
would give us--
so this would be
true for many C in C.
And that would give us A prime
plus C1, B prime plus C2,
B prime plus C3, B prime would
still be smaller than A prime.
You could get that
from Plünnecke-Ruzsa.
And so now we're not
done yet, but you
have the feeling
that we keep using
these tools from
additive combinatorics,
and we keep having stronger and
stronger sounding information
about A and B, more
and more suspicious.
OK.
And it definitely takes some
skill and some good ideas
to finish from here.
But we're in a setting where the
tools of additive combinatorics
are quite powerful and they're
able to analyze what happens.
OK, good.
Any final questions or comments?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: How did you reduce
to the projective case here?
LAWRENCE GUTH: We reduce
to the projective case
at the beginning.
So after we had the
submultiplicative lemma,
we reduced to the
projective case
by saying that this ball
is in the projective case.
And so using that,
we were able to show
that it suffices to prove
it for the projective case.
AUDIENCE: But then how do
you chain that argument
in the projective case?
LAWRENCE GUTH: What's that?
AUDIENCE: Like, I
don't understand
how you use that kind of
argument and the reduction
to projective at the same time.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Ah.
The question is about how
we put together reducing
to the projective case with all
the other things that we did.
Yeah.
OK.
So using this lemma,
we had an argument
that if you could prove a good
bound for the projective case,
then combining it
with this lemma
and noticing that
this is projective,
then we get a good bound
for the general case.
So now we just
imagine we're trying
to prove the theorem
in the projective case.
So we can assume that we're
And then we start applying
the submultiplicative lemma.
Ah.
So you're wondering,
when we do this--
yeah.
So you can think
of in this picture
where, over here we have
not just some abstract thing
but this would be the
R in the small ball
and the R for the fat tubes.
So we look at those, and if the
R is better than multiplying
the small balls
times the fat tubes,
then we keep breaking things up.
We can take the small balls and
break them into smaller balls.
And otherwise, if
they're comparable,
then we look at
what's happening.
Yeah.
That's a good question.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: So I understand
what's going on.
Is this example supposed
to be similar to the case B
that we had at the
beginning where--
for instance, if we started
with tubes and points on a grid,
we kind of immediately fall
just into the situation.
And what we're doing is blowing
things up until we get there.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
OK.
So the question is how these
pictures and these examples
relate to the three
examples that we
had in mind at the beginning.
So the three examples we
had in mind at the beginning
were there was a simple
one, the stars example.
There was the grid
that was interesting,
and there was the
random example.
And a funny thing is that
none of those is AD regular.
Now, the random
one, we could fidget
to make it AD regular
if we wanted to.
And the stars, we could make
it AD regular if we wanted to.
But the grid is actually
is really not AD regular.
And so that is a
little bit funny
that in the most important
example it's not in this case,
even though this case is very
important in the final proof.
So you can't really
start with the grid.
At least until
recently, it was not
known what is the actual worst
behavior in the AD regular case.
So it may be that RAD
is much smaller than R,
but the argument so
far doesn't prove that.
And it's a little
bit funny because it
means there's not
an example that you
can keep in mind when you go
through the AD regular case.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: What goes wrong
with trying to construct an AD
regular grid where you
just kind of have a grid,
and each point has some
nested subgrids within it?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question is, could
you make an AD-- yeah,
I guess that's true.
You could make a
roughly somewhat
AD regular grid by
taking a grid of balls,
and then in each one of those
balls, you put a grid of balls
and you repeat like this.
Since the grid itself is not
AD regular, this is only--
it's only AD regular with
the big C. Could you do that?
Yeah, I guess you could do that.
Yeah.
So you could do that.
And then what would happen
here, the A, B, and C
would be like sets of
integers except they would
have this AD regular structure.
So A would be, take an
arithmetic progression
of intervals, and
in each one of them,
put an arithmetic progression
of small intervals and so on.
That's what A and B
and C would look like.
AUDIENCE: Like a
Cantor set looked?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
It's kind of like--
it's like a Cantor
set, but in order
to make the numbers
come out well,
you need to have a lot of
intervals in an arithmetic
progression in each step.
Here, I'll draw it, and then
I'm over, so I'm going to stop.
So the example is a big line.
You make an
arithmetic progression
with a lot of intervals.
OK.
Then you look inside of
each one of these intervals
and you repeat what I just did.
And for this to be a kind of
sharp, interesting example,
it needs to be a
lot of intervals.
OK.
OK, good.
Sorry for going a
little bit over.
Those are great questions.
Let's stop there and I
will see you next week.